00:00:00:would be on like a stream of consciousness to have your view of the start of Fide, especially the European chapter, what role you had inside. And if you can imagine in the story of the last year a sort of periodization, so we dates the Mark specific moments in time of the life of the institute.
00:00:30:And for us the most important thing is the dimension of networking. So how the dimension of networking and the dimension of being an association to get funding and this kind of things stays together. Also in relation to the governance, okay, so how the governance has been structured and if there have been a modification in the structure of the governance along these years. So it's just the first part is a stream of consciousness, then maybe we will detail some questions.
00:01:00:Along the way, okay. Okay, thank you.
00:01:30:So we're going to talk about the development of the governance of the 2020 when we found it CD, which is the Belgian think tank on the Liberty of democracy. And one of our issues was that with the Belgian G 1000, we were doing a number of projects that had international resonance. But being a Belgian association, we were limited among
00:02:00:three down to earth. When we would talk to a Dutch funder, they would go like, ah, that's great. If you would be an international organization, we could fund you. Or if you would be a Dutch organization, we could fund you on our national stream, but you're a Belgian organization. So whereas we were actually doing a lot of international work, especially after the Belgian project, I was asked left, right and center to either give advice, come talk, et cetera. But on the other hand,
00:02:30:when we were looking for funding or other things, we were considered a Belgian think tank. And so there was this kind of disparity. On the other hand, a number of other people were also seeing that there was actually no European equivalent presence. One of these persons was Guy Tanke-Kathniul, who was working at the European Commission, preparing the conference on the future of Europe.
00:03:00:Of course, the space was slowly filling with actors as the deliberative wave was coming up. But reminding Kissinger's old quip about the European Union, if I want to call Europe, which phone do I call? The reverse was true for the commission. If I want to get information about the deliberative democracy, who do I call? You had loads of independent actors.
00:03:30:But these two elements kind of came together. I wouldn't say expansion, but art's international role as a nonprofit, but not being able to take it up fully because we were about an organization. And on the other hand, there was slowly a request from the international level for more connection, not unification, but at least to have a bit of an overview
00:04:00:of what was happening connected in one place. Also, the Council of Europe similarly was moving into the space, looking for Victoria. I lost you there. But I'm keeping the relation because she's in a maybe not ideal situation of internet.
00:04:30:It's where the idea was launched to create an international organization. Also, and maybe the third point is that because the deliberative wave was coming up, not only the European Commission and Council of Europe were looking for advice, but also other people. And you had a situation where because there was not really a connection between the field, in some cases,
00:05:00:they would fall upon the first person claiming to be the expert in deliberative democracy. And that would suddenly be the advice they had got. In some cases, this might be a for-profit actor that would say, oh, this is what you need to do if you want to do a deliberative democracy. It is my thing. Or you might get people who just had their own vision of what it was, even if they weren't a for-profit. And that would then sometimes even be in a national case deliberative democracy.
00:05:30:So good. The example would be Marcin Gerwin in Poland, who between 2016, 2020, convinced several cities to do deliberative projects and had a very specific way of doing them. And so all these cities did that way of doing deliberative democracy. Marcin had a good way of doing this. So this was fine. And because this is recorded, the drawback of recording stuff is that you don't have to note, but I don't like to say
00:06:00:things on tape where I give the bad example. And I'm Giovanni. I'm not going to, I'll just say the generic thing. There are cities where people who had a very specific view of everything will be anonymous here. Just to know. Yes, yes. No, no, no, I understand. But if you want to stop the recording, we can do also. The point is that there are a few places where people, even in a benign way, had a very specific way of doing
00:06:30:things. Let's say, oh, you need this cannot be with 60 people. You need 102,000 people. And then the mayor would go like, increase the cost and increasing the quality. Or the gain. And then I wouldn't say opportunity got lost. But you don't get like 700 times to try a new model in a space where risk-averse politicians are trying something new.
00:07:00:Right? So there was. So this means occupying space, occupying space, but also with some ethical touch in relation to the possibilities of this space being invaded just by for profit actors. Not not invaded. Well, not that, but I mean, let's say in general, there was a moment arising and the feeling was there's
00:07:30:not a lot of chances to get this right. Right? And so rather, Fide doesn't have a fit for all approach. The idea was, and this was in the opening slides when we pitched this, is to bring together the leading actors in Europe. So if somebody wanted advice, we would bring, you know, Marcin Gerwin from Poland, the guy from Ireland, and et cetera, and have them work together rather than have one person
00:08:00:be a sort of oracle in this space. And I mean, people are whether they're vain or this is how they are. People like to be like, you know, the figure ahead of a movement. And so rather than having one person be, you know, the sort of oracle or free for all, whether they were for profit or not for profit. And so I always sum this up as we wanted to increase the quality and quantity, but always in that order.
00:08:30:So first increase the quality and then the quantity. And some people were like, let's do as many as possible and everywhere. And at some point in what way, whatever, as long as we can get them done. And we were more, let's get under one roof, some of the leading design people. And I mean, again, also Giovanni before I become seen as arrogant, we never claimed that this was the final set of people, right?
00:09:00:And I've been another 10 persons. I always say, you know, Fide would also have worked if it wasn't me, but somebody else, right? You know, Camille Doublé could have done my job and it would probably have been the same. Actually, the litmus test for Fide would have been that you could probably exchange at least one or two people in our work. And it shouldn't suddenly have made a dramatic difference, right? Voila. This is a bit, this is a bit, this.
00:09:30:Some very intense definition that I like. And I would like to know in this case, the choice of the name, the F in the name, because in this period, the networks are working as networks, but they are working with different names. And these names sometimes have as light nuances different. When you talk about alliances, partnership platform, hub,
00:10:00:is not neutral sometimes the name. So I wanted to know if there have been a discussion around the idea of federationists, for example, something that guaranteed the same time in individuality and convergence. What was, how was chosen the name? And if it's that important to mark the characteristic of the institution? The name federation was chosen because the name foundation was proven not legal in Belgium because we weren't a foundation.
00:10:30:So initially, we were a foundation for innovation in democracy Europe, copying the idea of the new democracy foundation. But, and this is, you know, this is the way sometimes these things go. So we are an international nonprofit, which is different from a nonprofit in Belgium. An international nonprofit has to be declared by a royal decree, which means, you know, the Department of Justice will look at all
00:11:00:your paperwork. The reason is Brussels being an international hub. There is a special legal form in Belgium for international nonprofits. It's a much higher bar. And so when filing for our papers, we received after months a reply from the Department of Justice. The one thing in the whole paperwork was that the word foundation for innovation in democracy in Europe was not possible because a foundation is a separate
00:11:30:legal form in Belgium. And we would confuse people that we were a foundation, which we were not. And so whilst already having set the name and started on tracing with this name, we had Fidey. And so we Giovanni, with all the big thinking about the, we just went F federation. So there you go. Initially, we were going to be foundation for innovation in democracy.
00:12:00:So what's about the American culture? Otherwise, we would have been hired, which didn't really work because Fidey, as all people realize, is a beautiful play on words because in Latin, the words Fidey means trust. And so if we were a hub for innovation in democracy, we suddenly were a hide, which doesn't really sound well in English.
00:12:30:And so it's interesting because my name is identity, you know? Yeah, I could now give it a beautiful backstory. I just, you know, the piece is the first song, so I'm just being honest. I could give you a whole while we thought about federation because, and of course, thinking about, you know, Foucault's, you know, we had to change the name. We had to keep the F federation. It was. And I think it's more interesting. It's more interesting to talk about how we had discussions about the governance rather than the worst.
00:13:00:Yeah, in fact, the second part, it's about the governance and the eventual changes in the governance along this year. And if you feel there are still changes needed of useful in the change in situation of for one side, also the positive situation of deliberation, having been mainstreamed. But also in the negative sense, we have around us changes in the in the funding and
00:13:30:so how much governance is important. And what changes pass through? So it might be interesting to point out that Fide is not a membership organization. So the word federation in that sense is a bit funny. There is a man approaching you from the back. Oh, okay, no. So the idea of federation, if you still want to, you know,
00:14:00:have a play on words is that we federate people a bit in the sense of convening, but we are not a membership organization. And the reason we are not a membership organization is that if you want to seize the moment, you don't want to have four years of discussions about setting up governance and writing, excruciating statutes. And the problem was the following. In this space, you have everything from the local
00:14:30:government, you know, and the most anarcho-syndicalist people trying new models of self-governance. In Belgium, Deloitte will offer cities also consulting on how to involve your citizens, right? And you will have, you know, I am not going to name anybody, but you will have people who want to get rid of
00:15:00:their own business in abandoned villages in the Ardesh, right? So in this space, somewhere, if you want to set up a membership organization, you would have to define who is in and who is out, right? And to give you just one problem, I mean, I know a lot of people who do this for profit because, you know, people need to eat somehow and, you know, send their kids to university. And so you have a lot of good people
00:15:30:doing this as a for-profit or as a consultant. Really nice good people who do this for the right ethical reasons. But if I consult with governments and my members would include these, but then, let's say, slowly, I will give the extreme Deloitte would be like, well, if they can be a member, we can also be a member. If I'm giving advice to the mayor of the city on how to design a participatory project,
00:16:00:and then some of my members then are the ones that get the project and make money from it. As a democracy organization, you know, replace us with the car industry association and then Volkswagen. You'd be like, eh, that sounds a bit fishy, right? The car association giving advice on car standards and then one of the members of the car industry association being Volkswagen,
00:16:30:you know, getting money from the commission. You'd be a bit like, eh, this is a bit weird if you understand what I mean. And especially with the conference on the future of Europe upcoming, which had a budget of a few million euros, this was one of the big initial things we were having conversations with, you know, some people in the commission about giving, you know, very often ad hoc advice. Never a thing really on paper, but, you know, some
00:17:00:Zoom calls like we're thinking of doing that. How would you do that? If we had a membership at that moment where several of the organizations would then tender on the conference of the future of Europe, right? Try to get some of those in your roles. That might be seen as ethically a bit weird. And so to avoid all of this, you know, okay, how do you then write statutes for a membership organization?
00:17:30:On who could be in? Because if you then say known, you know, all of our members have to be nonprofits. You're left with the G 1700 academics from ECPR and maybe three or four Scandinavians who can, you know, and maybe a few simple Eastern Europe organizations that were funded by OSF, right? But you could not work with, well, you would have to refuse anything from we do democracy to mission
00:18:00:to speak to IFORC to. So to avoid all of this, we are not a membership organization. We are actually, let's say a regular NGO. So with me and a staff, I have a board with several respected people in this field, an executive board, and we have an advisory board. The advisory board is
00:18:30:let's say again, I would call it a collection of respectable figures in this space, but without claiming this is the perfect set or any arrogance about, you know, I would say to some extent, you know, not completely interchangeable, but, yeah, Calypso is in there. You could be in there in Calypso.
00:19:00:And you know, that shouldn't change the, I think a good ship means at some point you could change a bit and the course of the ship wouldn't change dramatically. That would be actually a good definition for me of a good governance. So the members, for example, the advisory committee are identified by whom.
00:19:30:So they are invited by the executive board. But to be honest, the advisory board is a more symbolic role as in many organizations. The advisory board to a large extent, a bit in the American system is more a group of people that shows who
00:20:00:supports your organization, what is reflected in your organization, rather than that you engage them constantly. Because to be honest, if I want to come to the core of your thing, there are just too many networks and hubs and meetings and groups. You can basically spend your day going from workshops to workshops from nets for them to scale them to feed them.
00:20:30:So that's a great idea. And you could see the work in the city today too and never work on democracy because you're so busy networking and connecting with others and writing reports and doing workshops and more workshops. I'm being a bit cynical, but there's more money for networking and workshops and then actually for sometimes for citizen assemblies. Right? I had this discussion with people in Moldova this week who are doing a two-week end assembly because they collected a few 10,000 euros.
00:21:00:We will happily travel all to Lisbon for a great meeting and then to Vienna and then to... And I do this too, right? I'm constantly invited. I have three interviews like this this week just to say like how many networking and thinking and researching and hubbing and so we saw the advisory board. We did two meetings with the advisory board. I would say 90% of
00:21:30:murder offered by the agency program. So only 90% allowed after 30%. And if they throw away the dollar shares, they're like, really I think people would be punished and initially trying to..
00:22:00:I would say ridiculous, but you were with there like, well, we don't have anything at the moment. Whereas at some moments, for example, the city of Paris asked us, oh, would you help us design a process? And then I just pulled some people together, right? Which is much easier. You ask a few people, hey, do you have time?
00:22:30:You want to collaborate on this. And so I would rather say that network is used as a sort of high profile volunteers than as a structural governance system. So I have a number of people, including the advisory board, which is a bit like, hey, call on me if you need me, but I'm really fine if you don't. I have a full-time job and I can keep myself busy. So Jane Souther
00:23:00:will not call me at the 31st of December going like, you didn't call on me this year. I was waiting by the phone. But if I ask her to come and help for a school in Barcelona, she will come. Tell me, hey, I have, I can do this within my academic budget because this is part of a project. So you can run the school at a low cost. So it increases the possibility for people to participate.
00:23:30:Basically, this is a bit how the network works. The governance is the executive board of course works on a court. We have a meeting every quarter, right? Where I propose the budget, what are the projects before us, et cetera, which big choices should I take? So I'm not just an individual, you know, doing whatever I want. But beyond that, we try to more see things on an ad hoc basis than having a large
00:24:00:oil tanker over governance system. You know, with this vision, you're just expressed also on the multiplication of the stimuli about having and networking. How do you choose the networks in which you want to be? So somehow,
00:24:30:there is a compulsory need to be there. Or you start in the large number of opportunities you start choosing. For example, you organized, you organized last year the R&D meeting this year, the forum of FIDE is proposing itself somehow as a possibility of substituting, no, the missing year meeting on R&D.
00:25:00:So how do you choose and for which reasons? So to be honest, I've stayed out of most networks, including nets for them. Look, Giovanni, I have a budget of 350,000 euros to run a European network. There is hardly any structural funding to be found. The other option is that you start doing horizon projects and then you are
00:25:30:basically, and this is, I'm not an academic anymore, but CSOs are now sucked into that space. But then it means you're basically doing a project, which my metaphor is always the fire department. It's completely different as an academic. I had loads of fun as an academic. You think of something, part of it, you know, my old colleague in Antwerp, Stefan Volgrav would say, even if we do something societal, the first question is always scientific.
00:26:00:If it doesn't seem to work out, that's great because, well, great, that means you're still doing scientific stuff. Otherwise, we become service providers. So I have to think the reverse. I have very little money. I have six bullets in my gun. If I start going, oh, we'll be in nets for them. And then you have these meetings and this and this. Then part of my 350,000 euros, the money I have for the little staff I have,
00:26:30:I'm not going into meetings, networks, workshops. And so I really have to think like, what is the surplus value for this? Like really, and at some point, I try to avoid anything that becomes too much governance and less too little action. Just to know between brackets, I'm the only partner of nets for them that is not
00:27:00:coming back in the next project. So I'm the only one who gave up. Yeah, but this is not a criticism. It's great that some people are doing it. But there's also, there's also a tendency, Giovanni, to we all are all in the same networks and same projects. Right? At some point, you go to meetings and I meet you. I meet you. Can we, Jacob, and Hega, and we all can, hey, how are you doing? How are the kids?
00:27:30:I mean, that also means at some point, there is not enough diversity and we're just duplicating stuff. You understand what I mean? And so this is not, I mean, you know, this is not being cynical that all of this is useless and this and that, but that you could reflect who needs to be in a network and what is the surplus value
00:28:00:of me being in a network where already 10 people like me are. So similar to my board where I think like people could be interchangeable, I sometimes think like, do I need to be there or will this work? Nets for them works fine without me. I think, you know, feed it was invited, but I think it works great. And so I can do something else. Right? And so I think in all this networking and scale them
00:28:30:in whatever, we should also reflect a bit like how big do these things need to be? Does everybody need to be in the boat? And coming back to funding being scarce, I think we need to be very judicious about this. I think we have a responsibility because to be honest, and so this is really, you know, I'm older than half a century, which a hundred years ago would make me a very old man under a tree. So I just say my wisdoms and I don't care is that the
00:29:00:funding being so limited, especially now that OSF is gone and USAID is gone and etc. You know, we should judiciously think and we have a responsibility to think like, okay, what are we doing? Is this a necessary way to spend these funding or because everything we don't spend on just giving the money, right, to an organization that runs a thing?
00:29:30:We have to spend our money on an organization that runs a lot of money. So I think we should have a responsibility because the cake is not getting bigger. You know, if we say we take a slice of the cake to go three days to Prague and sit in a room and think about something and then come out with something that is okay for us, we have spent 50,000 euros all together in planes, hotels, time,
00:30:00:I meet in Bulgaria, Moldova, who sometimes have 20,000 euros to run an actual process with citizens. And so the whole thing for me is a bit, what is the surplus value we are still delivering? And especially with project work, I always say my litmus test is, would I have done this if this project didn't exist?
00:30:30:Right? Like, would I have? Because to give you an example, at some point a funder was like, oh, we have this interesting thing about border areas. Would feed a bee interested in. And, you know, I don't do this alone with the board. I reflect, would we have done something around border areas with the Tata, if it wasn't for this project? And this is the best thing
00:31:00:investment of the few hundred thousand euros that I have. Right? And we decided, no, this is like something this foundation is interested in. And we would be, you know, putting our little speed boat and going towards that bow, just because there's money in there. But it's not something we would have done otherwise. So we do reflect on this. And so, just saying, sorry, you want to the stream of consciousness
00:31:30:here you have it, right? Giovanni? Be careful what you ask for. It's very interesting because you're making a merge of something that normally people sense or that is that between the two logic, push and pull, sometimes you have to do a choice. No? So you have to decide if it's money that is driving you or are your ideas and your needs that sometimes have
00:32:00:the possibilities where there is money for them. So, it's about money. But what I realized more and more is also it's about we all want to be agreeable to each other. Right? So, so for example, when I think it was Anthony, but again, don't quote me on this. Was I going to be sitting up next for them? Would you be interested in, etc?
00:32:30:The easiest thing is to go like, oh yeah, that's super interesting. But as soon as you go like, no, feed it will stay out of this. You will have a follow up like, oh, why? And so there is a sort of, and here you could go to, you know, Foucault or whatever. There's a form of self-sensorship to all be nice towards. I wouldn't say nice, but kind of
00:33:00:I've said no to a lot of horizon projects. Half of my job, I actually tell my staff half of my job is saying no to people and justifying myself. And because I am who I am and I have a bit of a name, I can, I can stand that. Right? But again, this is not for the papers, but there's now this week probably one of the organizations in our space will launch a European project that's been working on
00:33:30:for a very long time. You'll see it appear. And I was asked repetitively if we wanted to be part of this. And I said, no, this is not in my priorities. Great, good luck with it. I hope you succeed. But at some point I was having a coffee with somebody and who said, oh, you look edgy. And it was like I had to justify for the fifth time. Why are you not a part? Why are you saying no? It's almost like saying to a friend, why are you not coming to my party? And so it's not only about my media body.
00:34:00:It's also been, similarly, the product thing is not accidental. I was at a thing in Prague recently with a lot of, in a select group of 15 European, well, thinkers about something. And I felt for three days we were just reflecting. And I said at the end, like, what have we actually done here that will change what's not in the room, right? Except reflecting.
00:34:30:Post it. And it's annoying. It's really annoying. And so part of this is also, and I'm not saying I'm a stronger character. I'm just, I often joke that I'm just a pain in the ass. It's just like, and I'm not saying you have to say no to everything. But I just feel that I've said no to some, like, for example, Horizon Projects. Feede is a no horizon project. Some people just go like, yeah,
00:35:00:but some come with a follow up, like, but why? And this is a great project. And you have to justify yourself. And so it's not just about money. It's also about being judicious and being critical towards each other sometimes. And I mean, you could also be very critical of me, right? And don't worry. I get that. I sometimes hear that that I'm difficult.
00:35:30:And this and that. So it's, you know, but yeah, sorry. But no, no, this, this resonates. Nobody is exactly what we want because it's a, it's a, it's a myelotical thing to understand ideas. And I think this resonates quite well with what you said before about we would like to increase quality and quantity and in this order. No, so it looks like a
00:36:00:life philosophy because you're choosing your, your, your being present or not in places also according to this. So a question I have is when, what type of challenging visions or challenges project you would accept, for example, so if you normally say no to things that do not add value to your experiment,
00:36:30:or you're not going to be able to, you know, you're not going to be able to take the initiative. For example, you did this example on border areas. What could the move you from say no, for example? So you have in mind some strategic area. I think that the border, the border of participation are responding. So there are elements discussed about nonhumans, about future generation. What element in this moment would attract you to say a yes
00:37:00:and no, just to understand what is challenging you? So I would say we don't do a lot of projects. My getting the qualities more trying to connect people, trying to actually bring some of those resources of, or moments that people can't do themselves because they don't have the time. This is, for example, why I work more with civil servants than with
00:37:30:academics, right? Academics have plenty of time. Whereas somebody working in the Polish parliament, on participation, being the single senior civil servant, there's no participation service. It's one person will have a surplus value of being connected with the person who does this in the Bundestag or at the Sizu and being able to exchange. Or these people telling us, you know what we can't get right is communication. How do we get, you know, we, if we organize something,
00:38:00:you know, so could we learn a bit from others? How they have connected with the media? We will set up a webinar around this and these are concrete examples. On concrete projects, we hardly do any. First of all, because it's so time intensive, it really, you know, means, and that's great. If, again, if you are as a researcher, this is your project. I've done stuff like that where you're, you know, I've done a project on
00:38:30:LGBTQ young people and then for a year, you just interview these people in Brussels, right? Great. But as a federation with a budget of 350, I have to pick the ones I do. And so I would say the criteria would be, they have to be connected. 90% of the time, they have to be connected to some real world impact with a government. Or so this is why I stayed out of the democratic
00:39:00:Odyssey. I was like, this is great. Go experiment, but you don't A, you don't need me there. You have great people. This is a great example. I wasn't involved in the Odyssey. I was like, this is great, but you have Kami, even at your Talipso, you are, you know, Nicolom, you know, Milanese, you know, great addition. And I could travel to Athens, but you're fine without me. But it wasn't really connected. It was an experiment, a trial. So great.
00:39:30:But not immediately connected to, you know, some policymaking. Then the second one would be it needs to be a project that where the make or break would probably have a wider impact, whether in that region or country that form of participation is seen as a success or a failure. Or it is a lighthouse project that could be, this is why
00:40:00:what was Belgian was or Paris was where you would see, if this succeeds, this will become a sort of beacon where other people can, you know, refer to. And then the third would be whether, you know, I'm really needed to make this happen or not or Fede. So this is where, even if the Odyssey probably would be, let's say a thing that was really connected to the commission and would really be
00:40:30:done. Maybe if I looked at the line up, I would go like, great, you guys do that, you know, success, good luck, but I'm going to do something else because you're already good. So there's always this treat here. What impact does it have on real policy? Is it connected to real policy makers? So because there's loads of experimentation, that's great. But that's where the 700 academics at ECPR's Democratic Innovation Group are.
00:41:00:Right? For doing things like, do we bring in a tree in an river into an assembly? How do we do that? Great. You experiment. If something works, I'll read about it. Then, you know, we'll see how we can bring this into an assembly. Second, is this a project with some visibility? So some run of the mill city in Germany, right? Germany has dozens of city assemblies, some run of the mill city.
00:41:30:So I'm going to do something around mobility. That's not a lighthouse project or a project that will change the course of how these things are seen in Germany or whatever. So great. But the first one in a city in Moldova might be one where I go like, okay, this might change the perception because, you know, this is the one time this will happen in Moldova in Kichinau. So if this falters and these people don't have a lot of help, you know, this is must-art
00:42:00:in Bosnia where we did get involved. First one in Bosnia at a city level with a city government saying we want to do this in an inter-ethnic situation. That's a kind of like, okay, if this works. So, and then the last, you know, weather and not being arrogant, but kind of like, can I make a meaningful conclusion? So that would be the three-tier Steve to which. And then there's not a lot coming out. So this is why we're doing
00:42:30:these regularly here in Ukraine. Yeah, we have a lot of places to do sets to maintain this new long train now. It passes must, it is with city governments. Yes. Yes, especially. It's a. And, key of it. Too small ones last year. But in very small towns.
00:43:00:of Europe reached out to us saying, you know, we really want to make this work. So could you give advice? And so we are. We are actually Giovanni in that one, where paid a few thousand euros to help three cities. If I was a for profit, you know, I would be losing money on this. So basically we invest in those projects. So Kyle Redman is doing a lot of work on those. If I count his hours, I think the budget that the Council of Europe gives us and don't put this in the report,
00:43:30:would cover one of the three cities maybe for the time we've invested in it. It's less than 10,000 euros to fully guide them, be available on every one of the weekends, which is three weekends, three cities, nine weekends. I mean, the Lloyd wouldn't come out of the elevator for that money. So nice definition. We're not come out from the elevator is fantastic. Okay.
00:44:00:Now it's it's it's very interesting because you you show like a clear a clear vision of priorities, which possibly depends. I mean, from your vision, but also I think because I'm becoming a little bit more I'm changing in this direction with age. I think it's choosing priorities. It becomes also important in human terms, not only professional terms, no?
00:44:30:To a point that you say, okay, I have to do less, I'm less multitasking than I was. So I have to start choosing. And one thing that struck me about your three criteria for choosing was in the example you did about the person, the interchanged between a person in the Bundestag going Cezé, for example. So I was thinking this show that the dimension of networking as a space for
00:45:00:mutual learning, it's important. So you're dismissing somehow networking when it's just about blah, blah, blah, but if networking is about a proper space for learning, this is important and is still a very important priority in your work. So somehow you said you something that sounds like I'm supporting those that are alone and lost in the networking world and I'm helping them to network.
00:45:30:In a solid and practical way. So that's that sounds very interesting. And I just a second, my doorbell is going. I'll be back in a second.
00:46:00:Please enter stepping. Okay. I'm eating because I still didn't do breakfast. So I use this.
00:46:30:Okay.
00:47:00:And to navigate this possibility of interchanged. So there I am again. So this is actually a network that we did set up. Which I think this is an idea I had with Dominic Hileman during, I would say the aftermath of the conference on the future of Europe where we realized there were a number of people
00:47:30:who were in the guillotine, but a few others who would come to some of these meetings organized around the conference. But it would done by the European Policy Center and others. But this was limited to the people who were in Brussels or could attend and et cetera. And we realized that this was an actor that didn't have a lot of opportunities yet
00:48:00:in the civil servant either at the regional level, national level or higher. Having a crucial impact coming again to my tree criteria, they have a crucial impact on how tenders are written, what type of advice they give to politicians who suddenly come with this idea and et cetera. In many cases were in limited spaces or isolated, even the Bundestag
00:48:30:it's one lead person and two or three people max for a country of 80 million. And so we felt this is where we can make an impact is on quality, is increase the capacity and resources of these people because they are crucial actors in the field. And so we set up a small network. And again, this is not an open network. So I think it's
00:49:00:a good way to reflect is I would say by invitation because networks that suddenly have 300, 400 people become a governance in themselves. You lose a sort of impact by delusion in some cases. Sometimes that's good. ECPR meeting APS A, you go and it's fertile once a year to be amongst the very
00:49:30:broad crowd. But this was seen as a professional network. So we basically started inviting people working in regional or level or above that were already doing something like this, starting with deliberative projects or were fertile grounds for starting them. So again, don't quote me on this. I think you cannot quote anything because I say this often. But for the
00:50:00:moment we don't have the Bulgarian parliament in that network. There's no real thing happening. There's no incentive. There's no political will. So why take up civil servants who at the moment have no it's like training somebody to become a car mechanic and in the next 10 years you can't see a car coming by their hands. It's no use. My deloitte metaphor was better. And so this network has about 40 people.
00:50:30:It's about 40 to 50. So it's Ireland, Osbelgian, the CISU, the Bundestag, the Polish same. Maybe now we would look at Hungary if we hear some rumors. Oh, this might be happening. So the same for example, the Polish parliament didn't do a deliberative project. But actually with the switch of government, the head of the same we know from some leading civil society actors was somebody who
00:51:00:was talking I would want to do a national assembly on something, et cetera. So we felt like, ah, there is a possibility there. So we're going to take this civil servant up in the network and bring this person up to speed and give this person also a network. So by the time this happens, she in this case can, you know, is almost some personal terms with the people who've done this in France, who've done this in Ireland.
00:51:30:And so it's not even about us, right? It means this person can then contact their peers and we could even be pulled out of the equation feed at that moment. So this is one network we've set up, right? Does he has a name or is just a total informal somehow? It has a name because we do this with Bertelsmann and they've backed up.
00:52:00:So I think the European network on citizen participation and deliber inertia, which sounds weird because then you could be a member too. So it should be European network for civil servants of the above or regional level or above and why regional level or above is just in Germany, you have like 100 cities and villages that have done citizen assemblies, 20 in Denmark, then
00:52:30:again, you would be running a network for hundreds of people and part of this network is who organizes this and puts time in this, it's Fede. So basically I have to convince a funder that I'm providing a space for civil servants who very often have a budget, right? So we are providing an opportunity with nonprofit money
00:53:00:for civil servants for free. That also means that I need to be very judicious that I don't overspend and start doing, hey, everybody's welcome and then this becomes a project that grows over my head because I have hundreds of, you know, oh, I will come to Paris to your meeting. I work in the city of Blablal, Lautron in the area with
00:53:30:5000 inhabitants and we've done this three years ago, but I will attend your meeting every time, right? And so it's about impact again, criteria. Just a clarification on this, sorry, I don't want to take too much of your time, but two clarification on things you've said. The first one is, for example, in this
00:54:00:difficult case you said, I mean, I tried to find a funder for this network work, but maybe they can answer me, but this civil servant has already their funding. So could you use, for example, models of mixed funding saying that who has the possibility self fund and who has not could be funded by you? So can you have a
00:54:30:volunteer aspect and a sort of affirmative action for those that could afford or there is not enough political will or some bureaucracy obstacle for that? No, I mean, maybe in that concrete case, but it would complicate things. Now the fact that these people already very often, you know, they have to ask a budget to travel.
00:55:00:And even if we would ask money, it would become a course. And then very often they have to have a certificate because otherwise they can't justify the cost. And then we would have to set up some sort of and blah, blah, blah. If you just say, hey, if they can say to their boss, hey, there is a conference for people like me. I don't need to pay. So just to give you an example and again, don't quote, but to make this very simple, the person from the same, the Polish part,
00:55:30:the Polish element cannot attend every time. We do this twice a year because travel budgets for people like that, you know, in Scandinavia, you can as a civil servant, we probably have a budget of 5,000 euros every year to attend trainings. But somebody in central and Eastern Europe, even from a region, asking, hey, I need to go to Paris and stay in a hotel. And the total budget of just the travel plus me staying there will be 500 euros. In many cases, they'll go like, and why? Well, it's about parts of the
00:56:00:patient while we're not doing an assembly. Yeah, but so if we would ask people, you could go like, hey, who of you could actually pay this? Please pay this. But then it becomes a bit of a management in itself and probably wouldn't be worth where we do do this. Giovanni is when we organize democracy R&D. Simple simply said is you put forward, we actually had said we
00:56:30:want to make this the most diverse meeting that democracy R&D has already had. So we vote fundraised for funding people from the global south. And we made a budget saying, this is the amount of people we want to subsidize for. You make your whole budget and you divide by the rest. And so the ticket price parts of the others subsidizes the part you're giving to others.
00:57:00:And to be very blunt about this, except one professor from Chile, I think almost everybody from the global south in somewhere other was paid. This is also why I told David's character. If you want to keep doing this on a voluntary basis, the organization cannot fundraise or find a way to subsidize those that can't make it. This will become a global North conference in a minute. Right? So we do this.
00:57:30:Probably for the Fide Forum, it will be similar. We will do the budget prize that it's a few hundred euros to participate. And this will allow us to have some people from central and Eastern Europe come that otherwise couldn't make it. And this would all of course not be necessary if I had a sack of money. But I've been knocking on every door I know in Europe to fund the Fide Forum. And we have a few helping us. Porticus, for example, without
00:58:00:Porticus Foundation, neither democracy or D last year would have happened, neither would the Fide Forum. It's as simple as that. It very often depends on one funder. And why? Because this doesn't fit in the project. It's a meeting. And so most funders will have very specific funding lines. Trust me, writing for funding as an academic is already fun as an NGO. It's even more
00:58:30:sort of every foundation have a different way of viewing projects or what they fund or whether they fund overhead or not. And so meetings like, hey, here is a one time thing. Could you fund it? Doesn't fit a lot of, you know, you will contact a big Austrian foundation. They will go like, oh, our funding thing is already done for the next two years and we only work with. And so
00:59:00:there we have to use solidarity as you just described. So a lot of it is adapting in that sense, I'm a bit of a businessman, right? I juggle the different income streams and I just try to make it work. As you're talking about redistribution and solidarity elements, my question is there have been a very traumatic moment last year in which Trump arrived and cut everything. And a lot of
00:59:30:Northern organization crashed down. Do you think that there are moments in which even among Northern organizations, solidarity can be important in this moment. United States is full of alliances of organization, newspaper, research units that are trying for example to make survive the data on environment online that are destroyed by American agency. So
01:00:00:the problem of democracy and reduction of funding is not just about the South. It's it's a struck in the North also. So I wonder if something like that has been discussed in your organization because you have an American in a chapter which is in North America. So I was wondering what's happening in that moment and how important was for you to continue to be able to connect and having them
01:00:30:in your side. So to be honest, we hardly take any funding from government. Partly because we are an organization that lobbies government. So it's almost a principle. I mean, this works for some. If you know, ACAS, European citizen action service, I would guess probably half of their budget is European money.
01:01:00:But I'm always a bit surprised. I think recently I saw from an NGO claiming for more participation and et cetera that the EU has to do more. And the last slide is funded by the European Commission. Yeah, no, but I mean, but there is a sort of issue slowly. And I don't want to emulate what the right wing parties are saying in the European Parliament that, you know, this happened for the live project where it is.
01:01:30:And so I said, well, you're giving money to ecological organizations that then lobby the commission for more ecology. And so the right was saying the commission is basically funding its own advocacy. Right. And so I don't want to emulate that criticism. On the other hand, we're not an organization that looks at a specific policy where democracy organizations. So we are basically working
01:02:00:on the process itself. And I think there you have to have a certain standard where you look at if I advocate for how a policy level should work. If I'm funded by so for so all this to say that we didn't have money from USAID. I don't have money from the commission. The only money I get from the Council of Europe is the few thousand euros for some project we do with them. A little bit of money for some
01:02:30:capacity building in the Balkans, a little bit of money for, but this is peanuts. I would say it's maybe 10% of our total budget. And it's because we provide a specific service that fits, you know, the tree tier roster we use. What has hurt as much more is Open Society Foundation leaving to be honest. You know, they were one of our funders. And so Open Society Foundation leaving for feed as such was
01:03:00:the biggest problem. My biggest problem, I think Giovanni is that there's hardly any funding structural funding. The biggest, I think the biggest problem, I mean, not problem, but I think it's that almost all funding is project funding. And I hope this metaphor works for you. This is like saying to the fire department, we
01:03:30:will fund you if you can say in advance which fires you will put out. And with the few funders I have, I actually do what I call fire department funding is here is money. And at the end of the year, tell us if you put out some fires, but we accept that you can't predict what's once. And so the organizations that are funding us now, which is adesium
01:04:00:and in the olden days, Open Society foundations, except these are the principles you work on. This is what you're trying to achieve. Just send us your year report at the end of the year and we will evaluate what you've been doing good work with our money. Which is what an organization like mine needs to be able to drive.
01:04:30:Otherwise, and you see this all around, most of the organizations you and I know do loads of little projects or big projects, horizon projects, nuts for them, whatever, otherwise they cannot stay afloat. Which slowly means, and this I'm not going to give you an example, but just ask around during the coffee break at the next conference, is that
01:05:00:at some point you have a staff of 10 people and you will need to get a new horizon project or a new serve project or a new nuts for them project or you will have to fire people. And at some point you are chasing projects because otherwise you cannot keep your staff afloat.
01:05:30:Because they were living off projects. So that's it. But in the prioritization of university is similar. Yeah, but there is a difference there to be almost done both. The two last projects I did was two ERC projects at the University of Antwerp. Of course, we had a big ERC project. We hired almost 10 PhDs. But after four years, these people were finished. And then you can go like, eh, I cannot give you a postdoc. Good luck. We've given you a great education. Whereas, you know,
01:06:00:between us Anthony has hired people with families and for whom this is a job. You cannot constantly tell your staff that they are like PhDs who are in their 20s and say like, eh, I don't know if you can take a mortgage because in two years this might be done. And so the stability that, and I'm not saying we need stability, but the reason people always think feed is like 10 or, you know, I've heard 20 people
01:06:30:do it. And so, you know, you know, with how many people we run feed a like paid staff. Three. Everything we do. Democracy aren't the organizing this network. You know, all these things are our website, our coms are we do with three people in an intern basically. That's it.
01:07:00:So if you have an intern, you can help your refusal. When when you refuse something as fee then, there is always the possibility of someone of your man of your organization. You said you're not they are not based on membership, but the organization you work with in the different country could accept to be in as single organization or not. Just to understand what is the relation? The
01:07:30:the organization located in the countries. We're all big boys and girls, everybody does what they, who am I to judge what people do? I mean, at some point I would say if, you know, let's say if Abordos would suddenly decide to go work with Orban, I would be like, I'm going to work a bit less with you, but beyond that, I would say, for me, I always say as long people,
01:08:00:as long as people stay within Article II of the Treaty of the European Union, you know, I'm good, right? And so it's not, it's not related to decide what, you know, I can say what my judgment is, but I always say this is just me. And this is what I said at the start. I think part of, part of this is also
01:08:30:you know, us shooting at different targets. And like very often when I say no to something, I will tell people, but I hope you succeed. You know, I hope I'm wrong. I don't, you know, I don't see this as a good investment for my time, but I do hope, you know, if I'm wrong, it means you're right and this is better for democracy. I just think this is, you know, so if this is what I mean,
01:09:00:if we all do the same thing, we're all in the same networks, we're all putting our chips down on the same thing. And great, if we were a social movement, but very often we're not, right? And this is a whole thing. Giovanni, you know, I'm recovering as an expert for hours, but we're not social movements. And this is the big deal. I know. So may I ask you a last question? Yeah, go ahead. Which is about
01:09:30:the, there is a dynamic between competition and cooperation always happening in networks because in some moments, you may be competing for funding. And how do you leave this component? And how important are the materials beyond the network? And how important are the things you produce in terms of example, in terms of stories, toolkids?
01:10:00:We saw that there are a lot of overlapping in dialogues with NOCA, for example, no? So on products, on manuals, on handbooks. So how do you see this dimension and how important are the products who remain beyond the network and beyond the events? I do think, I mean, if you look well, there should probably not be a lot of
01:10:30:overlap with NOCA. We've done a few things with NOCA. But actually, the reason we hardly write any manuals is because they already exist. To give you an example, one of our funders suggested, oh, shouldn't you write a manual for citizen assemblies? And I pushed back this funder and I said, look, you know, DEMNET has one, you, you in democracy fund has a great one written by a new democracy foundation. There's loads of them already out there.
01:11:00:And I said, we will make a resource page on our web page to direct people towards other people. So we, we downloaded all of it. So I saw that your specific documents are not so many, many are linked to others. No, so for example, one of the things we specialize in are that I've done a lot of the work where I've been involved in, where it was feed air, G1000 is by some accident, I've been involved in several of the few cases of institutional
01:11:30:ized citizen assemblies, you know, Osbel, Jen, Paris, mixed committees in Brussels, etc. So I've written, well, Nabila has written a paper with Graham and I've now written a second one with him on this specific topic because that's where there's not a lot of knowledge yet. And, you know, a few places are going forward. But beyond that, I'm not going to rewrite any, you know, in the beginning, we did an update of the certification paper. It's already four years
01:12:00:old because at that moment, people were still using mass LBP had one about sortition and it was not updated and wasn't really good for European context. And it's actually my advisory board, one of those few meetings we had where we asked like, what should we write? What is still missing? They said, well, a good update of the sortition paper would be great. And then inclusion was another one where at that moment, again, we're talking four years, this, this space is moving at, you know,
01:12:30:lightning speed. We received loads of comments of people going like, but how do we get those people in the room that are never there? And we couldn't point at good guidance so we wrote it ourselves. Since then, we hardly wrote a paper and it's because there's enough other people doing great work. And so amongst others, Naka, so we don't have a paper on impact because the
01:13:00:commission will bring out something 90-page stake by the GRC, which is completely comprehensive. So, but there is, I mean, in some ways, there is competition, I guess, in a certain way, the funds are limited. We're all vying for the same funds, right? But, okay.
01:13:30:Thank you very much. You have been giving us 75 minutes of your time, so thank you. Thank you. It was a lot. I think you gave us very, very clear elements, which are useful to us. And sorry for this time, I hope it's a great way of understanding better.
01:14:00:You're, you work. Thank you. So, have a nice day. Thank you very much, Chiefs. Thank you. Is it a sunny day? Yes. I don't know. Okay, it's a sunny day. So it's something rare. Here is not. So, in Portugal, it's worse than in Belgium today. Okay. See you next time somewhere selected in a selected place. Okay. Thank you very much. I would like to see you, Giovanni. Hi, Ciao. Let's see you.
01:14:30:Bye.
